
---
title: MC-06 QWL
math: true
toc: true
weight: 7
---

In this tutorial we will introduce QMC simulations using the quantum version of the Wang-Landau algorithm.

## Thermodynamics of quantum Heisenberg spin chains

### The ferromagnetic Heisenberg chain

We will start with a quick tutorial on using the ALPS qwl code for a spin chain.

#### Using the command line

The parameter file `parm6a` sets up a Monte Carlo simulation of the quantum mechanical Heisenberg ferromagnet on a one-dimensional chain with 40 sites, using the quantum Wang-Landau (QWL) method.

    LATTICE="chain lattice" 
    MODEL="spin"
    local_S   = 1/2
    L       = 40
    CUTOFF  = 500
    {J = -1}

After preparing the input files and running the `qwl` code using the standard commands:

    parameter2xml parm6a
    qwl  parm6a.in.xml
    
You can produce XML plot files for the thermodynamic and magnetic observables using `qwl_evaluate`:

    qwl_evaluate --T_MIN 0.1 --T_MAX 10 --DELTA_T  0.1 parm6a.task1.out.xml

This will generate the following XML plot files:

    parm6a.task1.plot.energy.xml
    parm6a.task1.plot.free_energy.xml
    parm6a.task1.plot.entropy.xml
    parm6a.task1.plot.specific_heat.xml
    parm6a.task1.plot.uniform_structure_factor.xml
    parm6a.task1.plot.staggered_structure_factor.xml
    parm6a.task1.plot.uniform_susceptibility.xml

To extract the calculated results from the XML plot files generated by `qwl_evaluate`, you can use the `plot2text` tool, and then view this data with your favorite plotting tool. For example, to extact the data of the energy density vs. temperature, use

    plot2text parm6a.task1.plot.energy.xml

In a similar way, you can extract the data from the other XML plot files.
When Grace is your favorite plotting tool, you can also directly generate a Grace project file from the XML plot file using the `plot2xmgr` tool. For example, to generate a Grace project file of the energy vs. temperature, use

    plot2xmgr parm6a.task1.plot.energy.xml > energy.agr
    
Similarly the tool `plot2gp` produces Gnuplot scripts and `plot2text` converts the file to plain text. However, the preferred method for data evaluation and plotting is using Python.

#### Using Python

To set up and run the simulation in Python we use the script `tutorial6a.py`. The first parts of this script imports the required modules and then prepares the input files as a list of Python dictionaries, and then runs the simulation

    import pyalps
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    import pyalps.pyplot
    
    parms = [{ 
            'LATTICE'        : "chain lattice", 
            'MODEL'          : "spin",
            'local_S'        : 0.5,
            'L'              : 40,
            'J'              : -1 ,
            'CUTOFF'         : 1000
        }]
        
    input_file = pyalps.writeInputFiles('parm6a',parms)
    res = pyalps.runApplication('qwl',input_file)

We next run the evaluation program on all output files

    data = pyalps.evaluateQWL(pyalps.getResultFiles(prefix='parm6a'),DELTA_T=0.1, T_MIN=0.1, T_MAX=10.0)

and finally show all the plots:

    for s in pyalps.flatten(data):
    plt.figure()
    plt.title("Ferromagnetic Heisenberg chain")
    pyalps.pyplot.plot(s)
    plt.show()

#### Using Vistrails

To run the simulation in Vistrails open the file `mc-06-qwl.vt` and look at the workflow labeled "Ferromagnetic chain". Click on "Execute" to prepare the input file, run the simulation and create the output figures similar to the ones below:

(4 missing pictures)

### The antiferromagnetic Heisenberg chain

To simulate the antiferromagnetic chain prepare new simulations setting J=1 instead of J=-1. The parameters are in `parm6b`, the Python script in `tutorial6b.py` and the Vistrails workflow is in `mc-06-qwl.vt`.

#### Questions

- Where are differences between the two cases most pronounced?
- Why are there only minor differences at high temperatures?
- What is the value of the entropy at zero and for infinite temperature in both cases (if not sure, perform a simulation for a 8 sites chain to obtain further data)?
- How is this compatible with the third law of thermodynamics?
- Why does the uniform susceptibility behave so differently in the two cases?

## The three-dimensional Heisenberg antiferromagnet

### Simulating the 3D quantum Heisenberg antiferromegnet

The parameter file `parm6c` sets up a Monte Carlo simulation of the quantum mechanical Heisenberg antiferromagnet on a three-dimensional simple cubic lattice with $4^3$ sites, using the QWL method. The Python script is `tutorial6c.py` and the Vistrails workflow is in `mc-06-qwl.vt`.
The simulations are set up and run as above.

#### Questions

- Why does the staggered structure factor start to increase near $T\approx 1$?
- What are further indications of this phenomena in the thermodynamic properties?

### Finite size scaling analysis to determine the critical point

Finite size scaling theory predics the staggered structure factor $S(L)$ for this transition to scale at the critical point as $L^{2-\eta}$, where $\eta\approx 0.034$. A scaling plot of $S(L)/L^{2-\eta}$ vs. temperature is expected to show a crossing of curves for different linear system sizes L at the critical temperature $T_c$. In order to produce such a scaling plot, we set up a further simulation of the cubic antiferromagnet, for a larger system with $L=4$ and a cutoff at 1000, given in the parameter file `parm6d`
Evaluation now requires multiplication of the results with $L^{2-\eta}$ which is easiest done in Python or Vistrails. After running the simulation we first load the results:

    results = pyalps.evaluateQWL(pyalps.getResultFiles(prefix='parm6d'),DELTA_T=0.05, T_MIN=0.5, T_MAX=1.5)
    
Next we extract just the staggered structure factor S(Q) for any system size L, rescale it by $L^{-2+\eta}$, and set a label according to the system size:

    data = []
    for s in pyalps.flatten(results):
    if s.props['ylabel']=='Staggered Structure Factor per Site':
        print 'yes'
        d = copy.deepcopy(s) # make a deep copy to not change the original
        l = s.props['L']
        d.props['label']='L='+str(l)
        d.y = d.y * pow(float(l),-1.97)
        data.append(d)

And finally we make the plot

    plt.figure()
    plt.title("Scaling plot for cubic lattice Heisenberg antiferromagnet")
    pyalps.pyplot.plot(data)
    plt.legend()
    plt.xlabel('Temperature $T/J$')
    plt.ylabel('$S(\pi,\pi,\pi) L^{-2+\eta}$')
    plt.show()
T
he Vistrails workflow is in `mc-06-qwl.vt` and will produce a figure like:

(missing picture)

#### Questions

- Do the curves indeed cross?
- What is your estimated value of the critical temperature? Compare your estimate to Tc=0.946.
- How could you improve your estimated value?
- Would you expect the critical temerature for the quantum ferromagnet to be the same?
- How would you proceed to obtain a guess for its value? (Give it a try!)

## Contributors

- Stefan Wessel
- Matthias Troyer


