
---
title: MC-03 Magnetization
math: true
toc: true
weight: 5
---

## Magnetization curves of quantum spin models

In this tutorial we will look at magnetization curves of quantum spin models using the directed loop SSE application instead of loop, since loop does not perform well in a magnetic field.

### One-dimensional Heisenberg chain in a magnetic field

#### Preparing and running the simulation from the command line

The parameter file `parm3a` sets up Monte Carlo simulations of the quantum mechanical S=1/2 Heisenberg model on a one-dimensional chain with 20 sites at fixed temperature T=0.08 for a couple of magnetic fields (h=0, 0.1, ..., 2.5).

    LATTICE="chain lattice" 
    MODEL   = "spin"
    local_S=1/2
    L=20
    J=1
    T=0.08
    THERMALIZATION=2000
    SWEEPS=10000
    {h=0;}
    {h=0.1;}
    {h=0.2;}
    {h=0.3;}
    {h=0.4;}
    {h=0.5;}
    {h=0.6;}
    {h=0.7;}
    {h=0.8;}
    {h=0.9;}
    {h=1.0;}
    {h=1.2;}
    {h=1.4;}
    {h=1.6;}
    {h=1.8;}
    {h=2.0;}
    {h=2.2;}
    {h=2.4;}
    {h=2.5;}
    
Using the following standard sequence of commands, you can run the simulation using the quantum SSE code. As usual, XML output files may be viewed in a web browser.

    parameter2xml parm3a
    dirloop_sse --Tmin 10 --write-xml parm3a.in.xml
    
#### Preparing and running the simulation using Python

Setting up and running the simulation in Python is as before:

    import pyalps
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    import pyalps.plot


    parms = []
    for h in [0., 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0, 1.2, 1.4, 1.6, 1.8, 2.0, 2.2, 2.4, 2.5]:
        parms.append(
        { 
            'LATTICE'        : "chain lattice", 
            'MODEL'          : "spin",
            'local_S'        : 0.5,
            'T'              : 0.08,
            'J'              : 1 ,
            'THERMALIZATION' : 1000,
            'SWEEPS'         : 20000,
            'L'              : 20,
            'h'              : h
        }
    )

    input_file = pyalps.writeInputFiles('parm3a',parms)
    res = pyalps.runApplication('dirloop_sse',input_file,Tmin=5)
    
We now have the same output files as in the command line version.

#### Evaluating the simulation and preparing plots using Python

To load the results and prepare plots we load the results from the output files and collect the magntization density as a function of magnetic field from all output files starting with `parm3a`.

    data = pyalps.loadMeasurements(pyalps.getResultFiles(prefix='parm3a'),'Magnetization Density')
    magnetization = pyalps.collectXY(data,x='h',y='Magnetization Density')

To make plots we call the `pyalps.pyplot.plot` and then set some nice labels, a title, and a range of y-values:

    plt.figure()
    pyalps.plot.plot(magnetization)
    plt.xlabel('Field $h$')
    plt.ylabel('Magnetization $m$')
    plt.ylim(0.0,0.5)
    plt.title('Quantum Heisenberg chain')
    plt.show()
    
### One-dimensional Heisenberg ladder in a magnetic field

The parameter file `parm3b` sets up Monte Carlo simulations of the quantum mechanical S=1/2 Heisenberg model on a one-dimensional ladder with 40 sites at fixed temperature T=0.08 for a couple of magnetic fields (h=0, 0.1, ..., 3.5).

    LATTICE="ladder" 
    MODEL   = "spin"
    LATTICE_LIBRARY="../lattices.xml" 
    MODEL_LIBRARY="../models.xml"
    local_S=1/2
    L=20
    J0=1
    J1=1
    T=0.08
    ...
    
The rest of the input file is as above and simulations are run in the same way.

### Combining all simulations

To combine all results into one plot after running both simulations, repeat the steps from the previous tutorial. Here is the combined plot:

(missing picture)

### Questions

- How does the magnetization depend on the magnetic field?
- How does the magnetization depend on the lattice?
- Bonus: You can also study a 3-leg, 4-leg ladder by changing the parameter W for the width or a spin-1, spin-3/2 chain by changing the parameter local_S. Is there a systematic behavior?

